 I'm going to introduce here, Dean Peters.
 Dean, I'm excited for this one.
 I love the way you framed this, the dangerous animals of product management, and we've all
 been a part of that for some time.
 So take it away.
 It's all yours and I'll be the moderator.
 So folks, if you have questions, feel free to put them in the chat.
 You can hit me direct or hit everyone and we'll go from there.
 Dean, take it away.
 All right.
 Thank you for that intro, Chris.
 I'm going to hit my timer here because I certainly want to leave time for your questions and
 welcome to the dangerous animals of product management.
 The subtitle is the art of managing stakeholders while staying true to your product strategy.
 So let's move forward on the deck here and please say thank you to our sponsors.
 Visit them.
 Okay.
 I'm going to be handing out this deck.
 So if you're trying to scribble and take screenshots, you don't need to because, hey, this is being
 recorded and B, I will share this deck.
 All righty.
 Just a quick introduction of who this guy is in the safari hat.
 I am an experienced agile product manager and a recovering programmer.
 I've got about 30 years into this game, about 15 on each.
 Wrapping up at Icoovia, just the other day, and I got a big new adventure happening on
 July 6th.
 So for those of you who follow me on LinkedIn, you'll get to see where my new place of employment
 is.
 Uh, I enjoy building great products first by building great teams.
 Oh, and I forgot to add another bullet point there.
 And by having great conversations, uh, I've done a lot of work over the past decade and
 especially in the area of artificial intelligence, natural language processing, and in my spare
 time, I try not to crash my mountain bike here on the trails here in apex, North Carolina,
 outside of Raleigh while turning my entire backyard into a vegetable garden.
 Uh, for me, I'm going to try this summer to get a podcast started.
 I think that'll be a lot of fun as well, but let's talk about what your needs are now.
 So on the menu today, of course, we introduced myself.
 We're going to talk about the dangerous animals one-on-one just introduced them very quickly
 here.
 We're going to talk about influence without authority, because I think that is a key point.
 There's some key facts.
 I want to talk about that.
 And then we're going to get into a process that's sort of surrounding around some frameworks
 for very simple to use frameworks for, to help the prioritization process.
 And in doing so, I think you'll, you'll have a way of having these guided conversations
 here.
 Put a little more light on this subject here.
 There we go.
 Alrighty.
 So let's, let's keep moving on with the conversation.
 Thank you for letting me make that adjustment here.
 So who are these wild beasts who trample our backlog, our product vision and our strategic
 roadmap?
 And this is where we welcome, and you've seen or heard of some of these and some of you
 may not, and that's alright.
 Let's talk first about the hippo.
 I think this one's been around for at least 20 years in various acts of writing, and we
 know it to be the highest paid person's opinion.
 And I'm not going to read each of these bullet points here.
 Like I said, we've got to leave behind here, but I think we're familiar that it's usually
 the CEO or maybe the CPO or founders or other senior executives and VPs.
 And since they do have a lot of authority, there is the danger where they could push
 things down and those things may not be validated.
 Those things may be sort of outcome based rather, I mean, output based rather than outcome
 based.
 But even though their intentions are good, again, it creates a lot of context switching
 and some really good examples of some really bad outcomes.
 For example, Ron Johnson, who had helped set up the genius stores for Apple.
 And before that, I believe he worked with e-commerce at someplace like Target.
 And of course, he came to JCPenney with a lot of cognitive bias based off of past experience
 here and pushed ideas down on his teams and JCPenney, well, they went into bankruptcy.
 So he took a somewhat almost profitable group here and just drove it straight into the ground.
 Even though he had a background of success.
 When you may not be here as much as the really high value new opportunity, that's the Rhino.
 These are people coming out of sales, out of marketing, sometimes the chief financial
 officer, all of them, again, good intentions, but they're optimizing on features because
 they're trying to, they feel that's the way they can drive revenue.
 And so if you've ever read like the first chapter of Melissa Perry's book, and she talks
 about this sales driven type of product, you know, our sales driven type organization,
 this is definitely, you know, Rhino driven.
 And what you see this happening is a lot of startups and that's fine to get the ball rolling,
 but where it doesn't play very well is when you try to expand into, you know, into that
 growth stage and move forward to scale.
 And it's ironically enough, a company whose name is scale factor actually resorted this
 to the point where scalability became so hard that they went ahead and were actually hired
 staff offshore.
 So as part of their product, as people were asking questions of the product and looking
 for reports, they actually had analysts instead of the algorithms answering the question.
 And of course that doesn't scale.
 And even though they had a hundred million in seed money, they ran out of runway and
 went broke.
 All righty, here's one that's always my favorite zero evidence, but really arrogant, the zebra.
 Okay.
 Now you have the, um, these are sometimes the, the stakeholders, we have a lot of domain
 experience, uh, power players with a new organization, sometimes deep pocketed or our big enterprise
 type customers who are helped keeping the business afloat.
 And while they bring their, their big egos or their big wallets and their domain expertise,
 they are also politically savvy, which means when you start pushing back, you don't do
 it right.
 You can expect some upstream escalations.
 And this is where some of the motivations are a little bit suspect here.
 So you might have ignorance.
 You might have overconfidence.
 You'd certainly have a cognitive bias.
 The best example is I can think of, uh, is, is the block, you know, blockbuster CEO, John
 Antioco, who, when Netflix was trying to sell, uh, Netflix to Blockbuster for just a few
 million, uh, managed to laugh them out of the room out loud.
 And cause we see that really ended well for the people at Blockbuster.
 All right, moving forward.
 Works on latest fire.
 And this is less of a personality and more of a situation, and it involves DevOps engineering
 QA, and even us in product management, meaning while we have the ability to drive influence
 on, on, on the actual implementation here, because we're dealing with time commitments,
 because we're dealing with limitations, either in technical limitations or dealing with resource
 limitations or people limitations, we tend to cheat.
 And it's almost like taking out a loan from a loan shark, which, okay, it may solve my
 problem right away, but at some point that mobster is going to show up in the middle
 of the night with a two by four, uh, looking at your kneecaps for payment.
 And it's interesting because I think the most, the most salient example of technical debt
 was night capital.
 Now this organization had feature flags for trading features, and they had one.
 Normally with you, you create technical debt when you have feature flags and feature flags
 are good.
 I'm a big fan.
 However, they need to be managed.
 And after nine years of code, one of these unmanaged feature flags was accidentally turned
 on at the cost of $460 million in 45 minutes.
 And finally, our favorite, the swoop and poop that Seagull manager.
 And I found in the past, and I'll just give you an example here.
 It's usually that manager who's risen through the ranks probably has a lot of technical
 expertise or other domain expertise.
 I experienced one with a senior VP of technology who rose through the ranks, starting with
 an intern as a programmer.
 And after 15 years was the senior VP and more than once he came to my teams with, Hey, I
 spent the weekend writing this code.
 Can you put it in your, your, uh, you know, the system here you're working on.
 And I understand his, his, his intentions were good.
 I understand.
 He thinks he was helping because of his technical knowledge, but because of his impatience,
 I was trying to explain to him that this creates some context switching for the engineers gets
 them out of their flow.
 And it also creates what I call an unscalable situation, a bolt on software, which I refer
 to as Frank and soft.
 And there's just so many example this, so you just need to go to about every third Dilbert
 cartoon or every fifth market Tunis cartoon, and you'll see the type of disruption that
 this can create.
 Okay.
 So we've, we've gone through who the players are.
 Let's talk about how do we approach these beasts?
 And I want to just sort of dive into influence without authority because we hear that term
 throw it out and we've also heard it phrased or couch differently than we may call it a
 soft skills or diplomacy.
 And I just want to talk about it in terms of just some practical tactical, because I
 agree with that.
 And I agree that you need to start with empathy.
 So you need to understand their perspective and you're saying of home and it, and so that's
 just it.
 Who is the perspective of the end user?
 I prefer to start with the end user and work my way in.
 I just really don't like these situations where we're working on one side and trying
 to work out.
 So you have that.
 And then, then you have the perspective of perhaps who the hippo is.
 You need to understand what their situation might be or, or the rhino, again, some of
 these people have good intentions, just not so great execution here.
 So let's align their motivations with our product goals.
 Let's go ahead and work with the hippos and the rhinos and the seagull managers who are
 inflict this on us.
 Then we want to embrace transparency.
 I think part of the deal here is trust.
 So we don't want to just surface the what, but the why.
 And I think that's really important that we do that because when we provide the transparency
 of the trade-offs, for example, the opportunity costs or the cost between going one direction
 or another, or the decisions we make or the, or the customer insights we've been managed
 to collect, or even the, you know, that, and along with that quantitative data, that qualitative
 data, maybe the quantitative data we collect through analytics or data mining and more.
 We don't hurt ourselves by making that all very transparent and being willing to discuss
 it.
 But just remember when you put it out there, be willing to discuss it.
 And what this does is it gives context to the conversation.
 I mean, we want data informed decisions and ideas.
 I try to avoid data driven decisions here because I think quantitative data without
 qualitative data really gets us into a pickle here.
 And so they need to be balanced.
 And this works across the different wild animals in their prioritization to just keep that
 in mind and keep things transparent.
 We want to empower the stakeholders with technical know-how.
 Now, before we go to detail, let me put some guard rails on this.
 We want to demonstrate really what we're after is, hey, this technical debt or these technical
 hurdles and technical debt can manifest its way in many forms.
 It impedes our ability to scale and grow, which ultimately impedes our ability to bring
 a revenue.
 Now you don't have to get into the weeds of the geeky detail.
 What you do need to do is paint that picture through real world example, what's gone wrong
 in the past for others or ourselves and what could potentially happen for us.
 You could be in a situation where you hear back from DevOps that we possibly painted
 ourselves into a corner or that we've done so much feature, feature, feature, feature
 that now the product is just sort of barely holding on.
 And this really helps with the conversations with avoid the working on latest fire, but
 also sort of holding back a bit that charging rhino or hippo.
 We want to engage in tiny acts of discovery or TADs as I like to call them here.
 And this is a phrase that I sort of rolled out an idea I've been sort of pulling a thread
 on since about pandemonium in 2019 and it's trying to give those data informed decisions
 or some challenges to the assumptions that they're built on here.
 And when I say tiny acts of discovery, I really mean that.
 A paper prototype, simple data mining, an online survey, something that's very low res,
 something that's incredibly fast, something that's inexpensive.
 I've worked in some situations, in fact, I was with one or really talented UX person
 who we were able to get out just an online survey of just four screenshots, four different
 mockups of the same screen.
 It was very simple.
 Which one do you feel gets you to X?
 And that was it.
 It was very highly focused.
 It was very simple and the users were able to respond.
 We sent it out to about 30 people.
 We got about 24 respondents within the same night.
 It just said, did it the same day, got out the same night.
 It was interesting because the system that we're using to do that, and I'd have to go
 ask about the name of it because it gets away from me, but there's several that can do this.
 We found that of the 24, 20 of them responded in under 60 seconds.
 Now I think that's a strong enough signal to say, I think we might have something here.
 There are other types of tests that can save you a lot of pain and money.
 And I think one of the things we want to remember is we can use these tests, such as canary
 tests, painted door features, similar experiments in a tiny of a segment.
 So if you've got good feature flagging, this is one of the reasons why products like split
 or lunch darkly are so effective because they allow you to do this very targeted.
 So for example, if I just wanted to target just a few users in the APAC region in the
 middle of the night, so if I have a new release, I can put this out there in a canary release.
 So I'm now looking at maybe 5% of my user base.
 It's off hours because it's aimed at a particular segment of the globe and servers there.
 I can quickly see that maybe, wow, this messaging system, it creates a great user interface,
 but we didn't realize it's going to have this impact on the back end.
 Now you can just turn the feature flag off.
 Usually that 5% is not online, and if they are, you can reach out to them directly.
 And the rest of the user base is spared you trying to roll out a much larger rollout that's
 going to impact everyone.
 And then of course your customer support loves you because they're not getting hammered because
 you put out a release to 100% of the population in all your server farms and just managed
 to just blow up everything horribly.
 Again, it's about controlling the blast radius, limiting the experience to small, I should
 say tiny user or server segments here, but tiny acts of discovery works across all the
 players here.
 All right.
 So just keep that in mind.
 And then we want to train them to be like product managers, the stakeholder, now keep
 in mind, we're not asking them to do our job, but get back to this again, paint a vivid
 picture of the end user when every chance you have start out and paint, it could be
 a sprint demo, it could be a retrospective, it could be a vision and strategy meeting,
 it could be a business case meeting, it could be a meeting with the board, start by painting
 a vivid picture, not of the buyer, not of the stakeholder, but of the end user.
 In this way, we set ourselves in a position where we can use some of these frameworks
 I'm going to talk about in the next couple of minutes.
 And we can use those then to evaluate these new ideas and sort of flesh them out.
 It also helps with the validation.
 And it means then that you can engage these dangerous animals, these exercises, and you
 can be ready to surface things like the opportunity, the monetary costs behind these.
 Really, this is helpful for the rhinos and the zebras and seagull managers, I should
 probably put the hippo as well.
 Okay, most of all, let's connect the proof with the purpose here.
 Let's take the emotion and the ego out of the product decisions here.
 Let's take the cognitive bias off the table here.
 Again, this is why we always want to keep the company and that product vision and strategy
 out in the forefront.
 It starts with the user and you work your way in.
 We want to present quantitative data for sure, but within it in a context of qualitative
 feedback and vice versa.
 I think all too often we, "Oh, I've got all these analytics," but they don't resonate
 because you really can't pair things up.
 The other end, and going the other way, "Oh, I got an MPS score."
 Yeah, but what does the data say?
 I like using what they call early adopter programs.
 This is where I have a very small segment testing a very small set of features that
 before we bring it out to the larger user base here, and it's usually with just one
 or two clients.
 Again, this is what a good feature flagging system will afford you.
 And in doing so, they tell me what they want in weekly touch-based meetings, but I've also
 looked at things instrumented with analytics, whether it's Amplitude or Pendo or some other
 system here.
 Because I've also found that what perhaps the leader in the room, the buyer, their manager
 tells me doesn't necessarily reflect what their actual staff, their actual end users
 are doing with the software.
 So it's always good to have that balance of the two.
 And again, present your arguments that support the outcomes, the outcomes for the end user
 over the outputs.
 Get out of the being in the feature factory.
 Again, this helps you with your hippos and your rhinos and your zebra conversations here.
 All right, so we've got about five more minutes to go here.
 Let me see if I can get through there because, hey, you said you had a process for walking
 through frameworks, and we certainly do here.
 And I want to talk about four of them very quickly here.
 All righty.
 So first one is story mapping, and I won't go into it because I think we've heard a lot
 of this, but we look at this, identify the persona, their pain points and desired outcome
 here.
 What you're trying to do is capture their end to end journey from the beginning of seeking
 an outcome to the end.
 How they go from point A to point Z and all the E and the F and the M and O in between
 here.
 And you do that, you can then create hypotheses for the outcomes.
 You can then prioritize these.
 You can then start finding your tiny acts of discovery to validate each of these, those
 very quick tests here.
 And once they're submitted, you get that list because now you have an idea of outcomes you're
 after and you have some ideas for solutions.
 And that takes you to Knifen, which I've misspelled, I put an extra I in there, my apologies.
 And with Knifen, it helps you collaborate through by problem ideas, sort of to see what
 are clear.
 In other words, what's the most simple design, the no brainers, the low hanging fruit.
 We certainly want that.
 And if you'll notice in the diagram here, we're always trying to take everything that's
 in that, if clear is the best, we want to take what's good and try moving it into the
 best.
 We want to take what's, what would you call it, complex and move it into complicated,
 move into clear and so forth and move in that clockwise fashion towards the best practice.
 And that means you try to get complicated to move into clear.
 It's doable, but there are a few unknown unknowns, again, that may be where some experiments
 are required to sort of unpack those and it may be further sessions of just sort of refining
 and atomizing complex.
 We know what it is, but there's unknown unknowns.
 We want to go through the act of unpacking it.
 This will probably take more experimentation, more research, and in doing so you take that
 from complex into complicated.
 And if you're really doing a good job with it, or if you're really starting things from
 clearing up, you can get complicated into clear.
 There's chaotic.
 You know, there's something out there, but the cause and effect still aren't known.
 Usually it's a bit more observation.
 It's just sort of like, okay, we're just going to keep an eye on this now.
 We're not so sure yet.
 But still, it's worth trying to get that atomized enough so you can sort of get the cards out
 on the table and have that conversation that gets you from chaotic to complex.
 And then you have the disorderly, and it's just a crap show, and you do not want to touch
 that.
 That's your third rail.
 Let it burn.
 Just let it burn because that usually derails teams.
 So again, it's one of those things where you just got to sort of say, no, we can't prioritize
 to that.
 Now here's my favorite because once you've gotten to that point here, and I've used this.
 I remember inheriting a 6,000 JIRA story backlog that had been used as a black hole over several
 years.
 And they said, we're going from on-prem to SAST, so we need to sort of get control of
 this.
 And now it was around getting around Christmas and Thanksgiving and Christmas.
 So usually the night before Thanksgiving and Christmas Eve and New Year's Eve, there were
 some horrible accidents.
 And what happened, tickets that were over a year old managed to get put on a won't do
 status with a note saying, look, if you really want to do this thing, let's get customer
 feedback.
 We'll turn this back on.
 I think out of, I think it was close to 5,000 stories closed, two came back, two.
 And again, it's a simple scoring system we have here.
 And Steve, you're the author of this.
 So if I get this wrong, feel free to jump in, but I like this because you have this
 nice little Fibonacci score here, one, two, three, five, and we get to look at the problem
 through its impact.
 How does this issue affect the customer here?
 And we score that.
 So on this line here, each row would be a feature, feature one, feature two, feature
 three.
 And looking at this gray bar, we're looking at feature three, what would the impact be?
 And then we're going to multiply that against dissatisfaction.
 Is this a big deal or a minor annoyance?
 Because if it's a big deal, it's probably a big deal.
 Evidence, do we have that qualitative and/or quantitative data to support this?
 Because if it's low, it should be a low multiplier here.
 And I think this is where the idea of you have those multipliers, it really helps come
 into play here.
 To what advantage is it to the business?
 Yes, we need to build delightful software.
 Whoops.
 Okay.
 That's telling me I need to start wrapping up here.
 We need to build delightful software that's hard for our competitors to copy, but also
 improves our margins here.
 And then we divide that by the level of effort.
 This is where you have to have talk with development and DevOps, where we divide it up.
 Because as we bring these scores together here, now this gives us an idea.
 In fact, I was able to wire this into Jira during that situation I was telling you that
 we were dealing with here.
 And I'd meet twice a week with the product managers and the product owners, and we went
 through the scoring.
 And after about two or three months of the remaining thousand tickets here, we were able
 to find 100 out of that thousand of the top ideas, and from that, we identified about
 25 of the most valuable ideas.
 And we took those ideas and walked into a process called buy a feature.
 Now this is where we go ahead and we enumerate those 25 out of the, like I said, that we
 had now with the highest value.
 We assigned each a different dollar prices based off of what that value was from the
 idea method.
 We went ahead and got our stakeholders together.
 We actually got them together with a couple of customers, that's your option.
 We gave each participant not, you know, out of 25, you know, some amount, I believe was
 a thousand dollars here.
 Well, we only gave them $250 each, okay?
 And we did that by design because you can't have everything you want.
 We had them buy things, we said, look, microphones are open, negotiate.
 So we had a situation, well, if I do this, will you do that?
 Yeah, I mean, haggling, trying to convince others, and you give this time as they get
 to scoring in and they're done, then you sum up, you know, the purchases, you do a review
 of it, and you go ahead and encourage participants to discuss their purchases here.
 And I think that brings to light the prioritization.
 And now out of that 25, we may have those five that we can do in Q3, you know, those
 three, and it may not be the top one, it may be like, well, we can't do the top one, there's
 too much lift there.
 But the next two, and then the fourth, and then the sixth one, yeah, we can get that
 all done in the third quarter here.
 Let's, let's go for that.
 So again, now you've taken these four frameworks, and you strung them along to give you your
 validation due to your prior, you know, your experiments, you've gone ahead and gone through
 and scored them here, you've gotten them out in front of the stakeholders, you've made
 a transparent here, and you've positioned yourself not to have arguments on emotion,
 but these data-informed, highly transparent, highly engaged conversations that help you
 get from point A to point B. So the thing is, collaborate, and then through
 your shared understanding, whether, it doesn't matter which frame you use, there's a site
 called Folding Tacos that has 24 of these frameworks that you can, that you can try
 to use.
 It does, the framework is not so much important, you know, come up with your own if you want,
 but remove the emotion through experimentation and validation, continually show empathy,
 be respectful of the sense of agency of others.
 I cannot express to you when you're dealing with the hippos, the rhinos, and even the
 zebras, try to make sure that even though you have to say no and say no a lot, never
 take away their sense of agency, or they will escalate or work against you here, so just
 be aware of that.
 And remember, you don't want the dangerous animals to be more powerful than your customers.
 Start with the end user, end with the end user, start with the outcome they're seeking,
 end with the outcome that you're going to provide them.
 And I think with that, we are ready to go ahead and have questions and answers.
 I'm going to leave this up for a couple minutes, and then I'm going to switch over to the browser.
 Chris, I think we've given ourselves good time for some questions and answers.
 Sure have.
 Dean, what a wonderful presentation.
 I loved, loved, loved the tips, the exercises, and the use of the jungle animals, really
 creative.
 Some questions have come in, one that actually was on the top of mine as well, and I'll just
 read it to you, "Thoughts on ways to tame the rhinos and hippos who believe that they
 are, in fact, the Steve Jobs and say that there is no evidence because customers don't
 yet really know what they know."
 Yeah, I agree with that.
 I mean, I've read that before, in fact, in studying this, there is that person as well,
 what about the Steve Jobs here, and well, the Steve Jobs are rare.
 They are very rare.
 I'd mentioned Melissa Perry, who even mentions that in her book, Avoiding the Bill Trap here.
 Oh, by the way, if you go to my blog, I list the various books I've used to support this
 here.
 I've actually got a blog post I did in 2018, which actually talks about the resources and
 includes some of those, and they're rare though.
 I mean, yes, that person may believe it.
 I think because that person may be sort of zebra-ish, that, again, we need to make sure
 that we come equipped with the quantitative and qualitative data, because if we don't
 speak the truth of the data here, all this is going to be whoever can politically maneuver
 better, or whoever has the loudest voice, whoever's the most extroverted, and we really
 don't need that to happen.
 Again, that's why some of these frameworks, and then usually stringing them together,
 and these tiny acts of discovery are so powerful in helping diffuse some of that.
